Translation howto

TopoDroid internationalization is kept to a minimum level.
All that is required is to provide a translation for strings in three files: 
- strings.xml
- array.xml
- plurals.xml
and drawing tools names. For any drawing tool there is one file in the symbol-git directiory. 

For each translation language these are in the directory int18/values-XX (where XX is the iso code
of the language). For example int18/values-de/strings.xml is the german translation file for strings.

The master string files (english) are in res/values.
For the translated languages there are symlinks to the int18/values-XX directory in res.

All the translation files are "aligned", ie the order of the strings is the same in all of them.
This help maintaining the translations.

I take care of adding a string in the proper place whenever i add the string in the master file.
However the strings I add (and those I change) are commented, ie, while the master file contains
a line like
     <string name="string_name">The string value</string>
in the translation files i add the line
     <!-- TODO string name="string_name">The string value</string -->
     
The keyword "TODO" is there to mark that the string value need to be translated.
After providing the proper translation, remove the comment and the "TODO" mark. 

The following keywords are used:
  TODO    a string that need to be translated
  OK      a string that is used but does not need translation (eg, "DXF")
  NO      similar to OK
  UNUSED  a string that is not used in the program, but i do not remove from the string file, as it might be used in future
  FIXME   a string that I modified and you should check if the translation needs to be updated
          also used for a translation i think does not catch the meaning of the master string
          
Unfortunately string messages tend to be short and concise, and it is hard to get a good translation
if taken out of the context. For example "close" in english can be used to mean "closing the dialog"
or to mean "something that is nearby". The strings and array files do not have context information, and
this make the translation work a bit harder.

There is a sure way to find the context of a string: track its use through the sources.
This is not very easy, if you have no (or almost no) idea of how the sources are organized.
Another way is to play with the program, and see if the string translation make sense:
this requires that you build an apk using the translation, or wait for the translation to be included in
the next apk (in this case get the beta apk, they are updated more often).
If you make a substantial change to the translation, you can also ask me to build an apk
with your translation, and send it to you by mail.

Finally if you have any doubt about the meaning of a string do not hesitate to write me.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------
MISSING STRINGS

The Android build warns if a string appear in a translation file, that has no default (English)
value. It does not complain if a translation is not present.
Therefore it may occur that some strings from the original file do not appear in a translation file.
That is usually my fault.
As a translator you should check now and then your string file against the original (English)
file, and add the missing strings, possibly commented if there is no need for translation.

The "...Value" strings in the "array.xml" files must not be translated, so they must be present
only in the default file.


-------------------------------------------------------------------------
IMPORTANT: ENCODING
The string files are encoded.
Write the proper encoding in the first line, and use an editor that saves the file with that encoding.
My suggestion is to use UTF-8 to make life easier for you and me.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------
HOW TO MANAGE YOUR TRANSLATION WITH THE SOURCE TREE

Make a local copy of the repository.
Work on int18/values-XX files
Push your changes to github repo (I will get them automatically).

You can check the files in res/values-XX to see if I made any change. 
In case pull my changes and merge them in.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------
SIGN THE TRANSLATION

Add a line to the welcome string saying that you made the translation:
put your name and mail address.
If a user has something to complain about messages in your language he/she
should contact you; no point to write me: might be a language that i do not
know at all.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------
DRAWING TOOLS 

strings and array is not the whole story.
The drawing tools names are also translated.
These are written in the drawing tool files, which are in the symbol subdirectory.
(The same files are copyed in the symbol subdirs of topodroid on your android when 
you install topodroid).
These are plain text file with one line for each language name.
If you change these you *must* tell me because I must increase the symbol version 
in the code, so that the drawing tools are updated when a user installs a new version of
TopoDroid.

Since this is a bit annoying (to the user that gets a dialog asking if he/she wants to
update the drawing tools), try to limit it and to do all the changes at once.

You can test your changes to the drawing tools without installing a new apk.
Copy the new files in the subdirectories of topodroid/symbols on your android and
restart topodroid (you might have to stop the app explicitly with a task manager or
the Settings app).
